% !TeX root = ../../thesis.tex
\chapter*{Acknowledgments}
%
\label{ch:preface}
%

\epigraphhead[\epipos]{%
\epigraph{%
%
  ``Choose again.''
%
}{%
  \textit{`Aenea' in `The Rise of Endymion' by Dan Simmons}
%
}}
%
%

As I am writing these acknowledgments on a cloudy Sunday afternoon in the middle of December, the realization
dawns on me that this section truly is the final creative piece of my Ph.D. puzzle. The irony that the last of
my scribblings will be the first thing---and usually the \emph{only} thing---that people will read does not
escape my notice either. It has now been more than eight years since I officially embarked on this journey,
and I can say that I am happy with where it took me and what became of its final destination. Even though
nothing from my first four years as a Ph.D. student made it into this manuscript, I do not regret spending
them in the way that I did. Of course, when I look back with more experienced eyes, there are a multitude of
challenges that I would now tackle differently, or even not at all. But I suppose that learning from one's
mistakes is the crux of a doctorate and life in general. Anyhow, it has been a long and winding road, and I am
happy it has finally come to a close. The following line from Mary Schmich's 1997 Chicago Tribune column
neatly captures my current sentiment:
%
\begin{quote}
\textit{The race is long, and in the end, it's only with yourself.}
\end{quote}
%
For me, the act of writing up this Ph.D. has been a constant internal battle between doing the minimum of what
needed to be done and getting it exactly the way I wanted it. Finding this balance throughout these past eight
years have been a profound personal struggle, but you would not be reading this had it not been for all the
incredibly supportive people that helped me get through it. I had thought that, given the already voluminous
nature of this dissertation, I could make this part a bit more concise. However, given that the most important
lesson which I learned from this Ph.D. is that you cannot (and should not) do science on your own, now would
not the time to skimp on words. So without further ado(s), here come your well-deserved thank you(s) (for your
convenience, I marked all names in \textbf{bold}. ;-)).

To start, I would like to thank the \textit{triumviri} of my Ph.D., my supervisors. \textbf{Giovanni},
\textit{sei il primo motore}. During my master's degree, you got me hooked on nanopores, and they have yet to
let me go. Your enthusiasm for science and innovation is truly inspiring, and I am glad our paths crossed when
they did. Thank you for putting up with my often turtle-like speed of doing things. It must have taken a
truckload of patience to get me to this point in time, and I hope you consider it to be a fruitful investment.
\textbf{Pol}, het eindigde uiteindelijk met jou als promotor. Je stond me al vanaf het begin enthousiast bij
met woord en daad om me om te scholen van een biochemist naar een nanotechnoloog. Bovendien heb je me ook
zonder aarzelen `geadopteerd' toen Leuven te klein werd voor Giovanni. Dankjewel daarvoor, en om me quasi
onvoorwaardelijk te blijven steunen doorheen dit lange traject. Ik heb veel van je geleerd, en ik denk dat ik
dat ga blijven doen! \textbf{Johan}, dankjewel om in me blijven te geloven en te steunen. Ondanks dat het
uiteindelijke doctoraat nog maar weinig te maken heeft met het initi\"{e}le project, ben ik erg dankbaar dat
je me de vrijheid, het vertrouwen, en de mogelijkheden hebt gegeven om mijn eigen weg te zoeken.

A big thank you is also in order for the members of my examination committee, who took on the challenge of
reading and commenting on this whole text. \textbf{Tim}, \textbf{Maarten}, \textbf{Carmen}, and
\textbf{Ulrich}, thank you for the valuable discussions and the critical questions. Your feedback truly helped
me to improve the manuscript. \textbf{Enrico}, thank you for chairing my committee! I really appreciate your
(and \textbf{Stefanos}') willingness to listen to my `biochemical interpretation' of physics. Our
collaborations have taught me a lot, and I hope we can keep working together in the future.

Even though this adventure mostly took place at imec, I also have quite a few people to thank outside of it.
\textbf{Annemie} en \textbf{Veerle}, we zijn samen, lang lang geleden, aan onze masterthesis en vervolgens ons
doctoraat begonnen. Ik ben blij dat we vrienden voor het leven zijn gebleven. Dit jaar zal een kerstbomentocht
er niet in zitten, maar volgend jaar lijkt het met wel een uitstekend idee! \textbf{Misha}, \textbf{Lorenzo},
\textbf{Huang}, \textbf{Florian}, \textbf{Mariam}, and \textbf{Nicole}, thank you for either contributing to
my work, or allowing me to contribute to yours. Without your experimental data, this thesis would not be what
it is.

Then, come my friends, colleagues, and fellow PhD students from imec, past and present. \textbf{John}, you
prime piece of Irish beef, thank you for your friendship during all these years. When I first met you (for a
training on the good ol' ion miller), your imec picture gave me the impression that you were a strict, no-fun
guy. Luckily, it quickly became obvious you are actually the opposite of that! I would really like to hear
that pigeon joke again! \textbf{Pieter}, man-van-staal, bedankt om steeds de perfecte (droge) opmerking klaar
te hebben op het juiste moment. Buiten een uitstekende vriend ben je ook een inspirerende wetenschapper (ik
zie je nu al je schouders ophalen)! \textbf{Dino}, my fellow simulant, thank you for picking me up at my
lowest point in this whole ordeal. You have been an essential part of this story, both as a scientist and as a
friend, and for that, I am forever in your debt. I will try to repay some of it the next time we meet in The
Golden State! \textbf{Ruben} en \textbf{Evelien}, hoewel onze start moeilijk vliegend te noemen was, ben ik
heel blij dat ik jullie mijn zelfs na al deze jaren nog steeds vrienden mag noemen. Jullie zien onlosmakelijk
verbonden met een aantal van mijn beste herinneringen, en ik hoop dat we er daar binnenkort nog een aantal
kunnen bijdoen. Ruben, merci om de ``if you can do it'' vloek van me af te halen, en Evelien, ik kijk er naar
uit om eens wat licht ongepaste verhalen te horen... misschien bij wat spicy food?! \textbf{Josine}, bedankt
om me zo te steunen in mijn e-beam avonturen. Hoewel er helaas niets van in dit boekje terecht is gekomen, zal
ik je lessen over EMMA nooit vergeten! \textbf{Rodrigo}, thank you for all the help, advise (except for the
`time to get married' ones), and friendship over the years. \textbf{Koentjes}, bedankt voor al je ongefilterde
commentaren! Het was top om je als room mate te hebben en ik kijk zeker uit naar een tweede portie rookworst
met boerenkool! \textbf{Hasan}, you can do this! You are almost there, just keep chipping away at it!
\textbf{Niels}, man van de Kempen, merci om me een duw in rug te geven bij die laatste paper. Je hebt echt het
verschil gemaakt! \textbf{Bruno}, bedankt voor de vele interessante gesprekken. Weet dat ik nog steeds in je
geloof! \textbf{Anabel}, bedankt om altijd zo ge\"{i}nteresseerd te luisteren naar mijn saaie verhalen. Nog
even en je bent er ook vanaf! \textbf{Young Jae}, thank you for the many philosophical discussions, I never
not look forward to talking with you! \textbf{Finub}, \textbf{Mihir}, \textbf{Ujjal} and \textbf{Sarp}, thank
you for the many thoughtful discussions (scientific or otherwise) we have had over the years. \textbf{Chang}
and \textbf{Yi}, thank you for the guidance and advise you have given me over the years. Even though some of
it might have fallen on deaf ears at the time, I am truly grateful for all the knowledge you have passed on to
me. \textbf{Lisa}, today I am doing better than average, I hope you too! \textbf{Victor}, you \textit{vecchio
brutto}, you will have to find something else to insult me with. \textbf{Maarten}, I am also always happy to
see you! \textbf{Kris}(-Cross), bedankt voor alle prachtige mentale beelden! \textbf{Kathrin}, thank you for
being such a kindness and empathy. It really felt like you wanted to carry part of the load for me. I still
have a single question for you though: \textit{Vere are ze hoarzes??} \textbf{Cesar}, \textit{mi amigo
dominicano}, even though I have only really gotten to know you these past two years, it somehow feels as if I
have always known you! \textbf{Wiebe}, je bent een echte topper... voor ne ``rooie''! \textbf{Olivier}, even
though I make fun of your habit of drinking ``diluted espresso'', I must secretly confess that I now do the
same sometimes. One of the many good things you have taught me! \textbf{Wim}, bedankt voor al je wijze raad!
\textbf{Karolien}, merci om me de laatste twee jaar zo geduldig op te volgen en bij te staan. Op onze volgende
one-on-one moet je eindelijk niet meer vragen naar mijn Ph.D.! \textbf{Anne}, bedankt voor al je geduld,
mee-denken, en recentelijk... kritische commentaren! \textbf{Xavier}, thank you for all the (happy) nerdy
conversations over the years! \textbf{Paru}, thank you for your continuous support and all the carefully
worded pieces of advice. Hopefully, next year I can again return the favor for one of your famous speeches.
\textbf{Pauline} and \textbf{Anke}, thank you for dealing so graciously with all my annoying questions and
requests. LST would truly be lost without you!

A big thank you also goes out to the many people with which I have had the pleasure to work with in the
cleanroom over the years. \textbf{Johan} (Jokke), \textbf{Johan} (Frakke), \textbf{Kim} en \textbf{Dirk},
merci om alle tools draaiende te houden, ondanks mijn sabotagepogingen! \textbf{Patrick}, bedankt om mijn
membraantjes met zo'n zorg in stukken te zagen! \textbf{Myriam}, bedankt voor alle SEM en dry-etch wijsheden!
\textbf{Evi}, merci voor de plezante babbels en om te lachen met mijn duffe mopjes! \textbf{Nicol\`{o}},
\textit{grazie mille} for helping me fabricate my samples, and your delicious \textit{cucina italiana}. I look
forward to eating your homemade pizza soon! \textbf{Abhitosh} (a.k.a. ``Warrior''), thank you for all the
funny `this guy' comments. I am still waiting for that fabled spicy chicken though... \textbf{Olga}, thank you
for being so kind and joyful at all times! And I am really looking forward to another round of your tiramisu!

Thank you all for being such excellent colleagues and friends during all these years, your enthusiasm and
encouragement really helped to keep me motivated and finally finish the fight!

Mijn familie verdient ook een hele dikke merci. \textbf{Vokske}, \textbf{Mampje}, \textbf{Vanereke},
\textbf{Billeke}, en \textbf{Rosco}, bedankt om me gedurende deze lange wetenschappelijke (en vooral
persoonlijke) reis zo te steunen. Door dik en dun stonden jullie altijd klaar op het juiste moment met raad en
daad. En \textbf{Rosco}, bedankt om je creativiteit op de cover los te laten, het was echt het puntje op de i!

En dat brengt me eindelijk bij mijn allerliefste \textbf{Minikop}. Dit (be)proefstuk had er niet geweest
zonder jou. En dan heb ik het niet alleen over de afgelopen zes maanden, waarin je zo onzelfzuchtig voor me
gezorgd hebt---en dat zonder ook maar \'{e}\'{e}n keer je geduld te verliezen met mijn `lichte'
perfectioneringsdrang. Hoewel we maar weinig van je favoriete thee/koffie uitstapjes hebben kunnen genieten
dit jaar, hebben we daar gelukkig nog een heel leven voor! Bedankt \textbf{Tine}, dat ik elke dag opnieuw voor
jou mag kiezen, en dat jij hetzelfde doet voor mij!


That's all folks. So long, and thanks for all the fish!

Kherim

\includegraphics{image/signature-kw}

December 2020



%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%
% Keep the following \cleardoublepage at the end of this file,
% otherwise \includeonly includes empty pages.
\cleardoublepage

% vim: tw=70 nocindent expandtab foldmethod=marker foldmarker={{{}{,}{}}}
